Technologies in the JavaScript ecosystem are evolving with a fanatic speed and while mostly this is viewed as very annoying by developers, as they constantly need to learn the syntax of yet another JavaScript framework, than focus on building stuff, others view it more analytically and embrace the rapid innovation, arguing about how all things have a lifecycle and if the ecosystem is still expanding so fast, it means that the technology is in a good position, has a bright future and is still under active development. Other technologies like PHP cannot claim such benefits, as they passed their stability period and are possibly nearing towards their end.

There are far too many technologies already placed on the field today, like React, Vue, Angular, Next, Nuxt and so on, so it's not relevant anymore to look at them like which one is the best, because each one of them has it's own strengths and is best for a specific use case. Think of this in the following manner - what can this technology do for me, what project or problem do I need to solve and which technology can I use, to solve it. Architect level programmers know understand this and for them this is like playing a strategy game, so they pick the best piece to get the job done, ok but what about the normal developers, the ones stuck in tutorial hell? Well, it's best they make an informated decision and master the most in demand technology first, but also explore others. The only reason not to master the most hot technology first as a beginner, would be if you want to go into a specific industry, where a concrete technology is used, otherwise it's a no brainer. Not to mention that you will be stuck with what you pick for a very long time, as you will both invest much time into learning the thing and it will be risky to change it later, once you start working in projects with the technology.

Simply said, for the regular developer this frameworks game starts to look much like a champ select. Pick your main and it's gg, but what if your main gets banned? Well, then it's best not to be a one trick pony.

### 1. JavaScript Frameworks
- React
- Angular
- Vue

#### 1.1. History
##### React
- 2011: Jordan Walke, a software engineer at Facebook, created the first prototype of React.js in 2011. The initial version of React.js was called "FaxJS" and was used internally at Facebook. At the time, Facebook's codebase was largely written in PHP and they used a combination of Backbone.js and Handlebars templates for their web applications. 
- 2012: Instagram was acquired by Facebook and they wanted to adopt this new technology, so they had to decouple it and make it open-sourceable. 
- 2013 May: The library was later renamed to React and released to the public, right after JSConf US. 
    - Fun Fact: The audience was skeptical. Most people thought React was a huge step backward. 
    - I personally learned about React in 2015 and also hated it, I mean everybody was talking about how we should not mix logic with presentation, so HTML & CSS, should be separate from JS, otherwise we are going down the road of PHP and this React thing was doing the opposite.
- 2015: React is stable. Major companies like Netflix, Airbnb and Twitch adopt React, the stack begins to evolve, as Facebook releases Relay for GraphQL and React Developer Tools, and the ecosystem also grows and tools like Reduc, React Route and Next.js appear.
- 2017: The introduction of React Fiber, which was a rewrite of the React core algorithm that improved performance, error handling, and enabled support for concurrent updates.
- 2019: The introduction of hooks in React 16.8, which allowed the community to really pick up functional components, making a paradigm shift.
- 2021: Jordan Walke, the original developer, leaves the company.
- 2023: Advent of SSR and Server Components in React 18, where the React core team at Meta was working closely with Vercel to deliver this architecture shift to Next.js, the new meta framework.

##### Angular
- 2009: Misko Hevery, a software engineer at Google, created the first version of Angular in order to use it for internal projects at the company. The name was inspired by the angular brackets in HTML.
- 2010: Google released AngularJS and is was the first of it's kind, a modern front-end framework. It it revolutionized how we build web applications, because before that we had mostly libraries like jQuery.
- 2016: The big panic period, as new standards were released, including ES6 and a lot of features were not up to date with those modern standards, which led to a complete re-write and the creation of Angular 2.0, the framework we know today.
- 2021: Misko Hevery, the original developer, leaves the company.
    - Personal opinion: I was curious what he would do next, after 13 years of working on Angular and now in 2023, I saw he works on QWIK, yet another JavaScript framework. 
- 2023: Except the big re-write, there is no other specific milestone, as overall, Angular has evolved significantly over the years, with each new release introducing new features and improvements to make it a powerful and popular framework for building web applications.

##### Vue
- 2014: Evan You, a former Google employee and a core member of the Angular.js team, introduced a new JavaScript framework called Vue.js. The initial release of Vue.js was based on Evan's personal project called "Seed" which he had been working on since 2013. The goal was to create a lightweight framework, in which he could put only the features of Angular that he wanted. When Vue.js 1.0 was released in February 2014, it gained popularity in China because of its ease of use and small size.
- 2018: Vue.js surpassed React in the number of GitHub stars, becoming the most popular frontend JavaScript framework.
    - I personally would like to express my regards, but screw that, because obviosuly the population in China is such a huge factor on why Vue.js has so many stars.

#### Use Case
##### React
The mindset of React is as a client-side framework, the general use case is as a client-side framework, the easiest way to learn it is as a client-side framework. You can use it for things like **SPA** and **SSG**. Once you understand that and you want **SSR** and **Server Components**, you should move to **Next.js**

##### Vue
Evan You explained very well what **Vue.js** was intended for, during a podcast with Theo Browne. He said that their userbase covers a lot more beginners, who are new to front-end or web dev in general and throwing them into **SSR** can be a bit daunting, so the main focus of Vue is a client-side first, for things like **SPA** and **SSG**. Once you understand that and you want **SSR**, you should use **Nuxt.js**

#### Comparison
- Architecture
    - React is a library, which means it only provides a view layer for building user interfaces. Developers can use it with other libraries and tools to build complete web applications.
    - Vue and Angular, on the other hand, are full-featured frameworks that provide a complete set of tools and libraries for building web applications.
- Learning Curve
    - React is generally considered east to learn because it has a simple API and is lightweight, but because you need to use the ecosystem around it, in order to build an application, it becomes as harder.
    - Vue has a slightly steeper learning curve than React but is still considered easy to learn.
    - Angular has the steepest learning curve because it has a large set of features and requires developers to learn a lot of concepts, like OOP, TS, NgRx, RxJS.
- Data Binding
    - React uses a one-way data flow, which means that data flows from parent components to child components via props. 
    - Vue and Angular both offer two-way data binding, which allows for real-time synchronization of data between the view and the model.
- Performance
    - React uses virtual DOM and is fast.
    - Vue uses virutal DOM and is fast.
    - Angular doesn't use a virtual DOM, but instead does custom DOM manipulations and is hence the slowest.
- Use Case
    - React is best for highly custom, complex and large-scale applications that require high performance and reactivity.
    - Vue is best for small to medium-sized applications that require flexibility and simplicity.
    - Angular is best for large-scale enterprise applications with complex data structures and high level of complexity.

### 2. Module Bundlers
Vite
esbuild
Webpack
Rollup
Parcel

#### Vite
Vite is technically viewed by it's creator as a shared infrastructure for meta frameworks. The tool has many components, one of which is the **Rollup** module bundler. Vite is also framework agnostic, it works with: vanilla JS & TS, React, Vue, Preact, Svelte, Lit and potentially many others.

- Evan You's reason for creating Vite was because of his frustration with the Vue CLI. The reason for creating Vue CLI in the first place was because setting up everything with webpack was a headache for most people, so they decided to build a CLI around webpack, but they went a bit too far, they felt like they abstracted too much, trying to do to much work inside of it and in the end the maintenance burden was huge and ultimately decided that this was the wrong direction.
- Vite first prototype was build in 2019, utilizing **ES Modules** from ES6 and in the eyes of Evan You, it showed great potential and in April 2020, after Vue.js 3 was released, Evan You revisited his idea in order to build upon it, in order useto replace **Webpack** in Vue.js 

### 3. Pick your stack

#### JavaScript Frameworks (FE, Micro-Frontends)
- React + Vite:



It's really hard to underestimate the power of excitement and energy on an engineering team and that's something you get in spades, when the technology stack is the correct one, the one a person mains. Because picking the right one gets people energized and ready to explore and build with this stack, and thats so powerful.