# ESLint
ESLint is a tool for identifying and reporting on patterns found in ECMAScript/JavaScript code, with the goal of making code more consistent and avoiding bugs.
- ESLint is the most popular JavaScript linter.         
    - Previously most popular were: JSLint by Douglas Crockford himself and JSHint
    - 2012-2014 JSHint was most popular, it was more configurable and flexible alternative to JSLint, which was more strict and opinionated.
    - 2013 ESLint offered even greater flexibility and extensibility through its plugin system, beating the competition.

## Setup ESLint

- Install the ESLint package in your project
  run `npm install --save-dev eslint`
- Create ESLint configuration file, named `eslint.config.js`. The file should be placed in the root directory of your project and export an array of configuration objects.
- In order to use `ES6 modules` otherwise known as es6 import/export syntax, we need to add the following top-level kvp `"type": "module"` inside `package.json`, otherwise we wont be able to run the eslint CLI later.
- Add configuration to the `eslint.config.js` file.

  - Syntax Example (a basic config, to enforce identation of 4 spaces in all files)

    ```js
    const config = {
        files: ["**/*"],
        rules: {
            "indent": ["warn", 4]
        }
    }

    export default config;
    ```
- Lint the code using ESLint CLI.
    - in `package.json`, in the property `scripts` add the kvp `"lint": "eslint ."` Then run `npm run lint`, which will run the linter on your codebase, using the created configuration in `eslint.config.js`, starting from the root directory, ignoring `node_modules` by default.

        ```json
        "scripts": {
            "lint": "eslint ."
        }
        ```
    - or run `npx eslint .` to use the locally installed ESLint executable with the npx package runner.
    - or run `.\node_modules\.bin\eslint .` to use the locally installed ESLint executable directly.
