### III. Vite

#### 1. Intro

##### What is Vite?

**Vite** is a build tool.

#### 2. Webpack Basics

##### 2.1. Setup

##### 2.2. CSS
There are several things, enabled by default
- CSS Files Import/Export
- CSS Modules

Others are easy to enable
- Source Maps
- CSS Preprocessors
    - SASS (incl. SASS Modules)

**Source Maps**
By default you are not able to inspect from which file a specific CSS style is applied. You need to enable source maps, which is done by adding the following line in your configuration file **vite.config.js**
```diff
export default defineConfig({
+   css: {
+       devSourcemap: true
+   }
});
```

**CSS Preprocessors/SASS**
Step 1: To enable SASS, run `npm install -D sass`
Step 2: navigate to `./src/components/MovieCardComponent` and create a `MovieCardComponent.scss` with the following content:
```scss
.MovieCardComponent {
    border: 1px solid black;
    padding: 10px;
    &:hover {
        background-color: wheat;
    }
}
```
Step 3: Import the `MovieCardComponent.scss` file in `./src/components/MovieCardComponent/MovieCardComponent.jsx` and test it out.

##### 2.3. Static Files
There are mainly 2 ways to serve static files:
- Serve them from the **public** directory
    - **Easy:** Vite caches these files and serves them efficiently, enabling faster load times during development. Also changes to files in **public** dont trigger a rebuild.
    - **Absolute Paths:** Files are served at the root level, which means you can reference them using absolute paths.
- Import them in your source code as modules
    - **Pre-Processing:** Files are processed and optimized by Vite or any of its plugins.

The configuration in `vite.config.js` is `publicDir` and defaults to `public`. You can change it, if you want to serving static assets from another name or folder.

**JPG**
Step 1: In the root directory, create a folder named **public**
Step 2: Place all assets inside, for example `./public/assets/<jpg1>`
Step 3: Create an **&lt;img&gt;** tag, use the **src** attribute and add the following path `/assets/<jpg1>`, your image should work now.