# Fetch API

## Introduction

The `Fetch API` provides a modern interface for making HTTP requests and handling responses. It is designed to be more powerful and flexible. It is is implemented at a lower level in the browser, uses different underlying mechanisms and replaces the old `XMLHttpRequest` API.

## Guide

In the following sections, we will delve into the key functionalities and features of the Fetch API. Here's what you can expect to learn:

- **Lab 01 - Basic HTTP Request/Response:** How to initiate a basic HTTP requests/response process and retrieve a resource.
- **Lab 02 - Handling Responses:** Techniques for processing the response data, including parsing JSON, handling text and binary data, and managing response status codes.
- **Lab 03 - Error Handling:** Best practices for detecting and managing errors, including network issues and response errors.
- **Lab 04 - CRUD Opeartions:** How to use the HTTP methods GET, POST, PUT, DELETE, and more.
- **Lab 05 - Abstractions:** How to abstract the Fetch API.
- **Lab 06 - Abort Requests:** Implementing request cancellation with `AbortController` to manage long-running or multiple requests.
- **Lab 07 - Caching:** Caching Strategies: Methods for caching responses to improve performance and reduce redundant network requests.

### Lab 01 - Basic HTTP Request/Response

Let's learn how to initiate a basic HTTP Request/Response process.
**Step 1:** Scaffold the starting project
- Go to `/008.Service Layer/03.Fetch API/resources` and grab the whole project directory. It contains a template `client` and `server`
- Go into `client` and run `npm install`, next run `npm start`
- Go into `server` and run `npm install`, next run `npm start`

**Step 2:** Implement a basic HTTP Request/Response call
- Implement `/008.Service Layer/03.Fetch API/lab_01`

**Step 3:** Refactor the implementation to Async
- Upgrade implementation to `/008.Service Layer/03.Fetch API/lab_01_v2`

## Modern Data Fetching Tools

Making basic HTTP requests/responses, handling the response and implementing the CRUD operations, is something every Junior developer learns how to do, as part of their training and is fairly straightforward for Regular developers.

However, with the evolution of web technologies and the increasing complexity of handling HTTP requests and responses, we as developers, even Senior, continuously face all of the above other challenges, which were:

- handling errors
- aborting requests
- caching
- interceptors and middleware

Each of these responsibilities involves additional coding and maintenance, which can become cumbersome as the complexity of an application grows.

- each high Mid or Senior developer will also have different approaches, each approach will introduce different coding style and other Seniors, joining from other companies might even struggle with the codebase, because of different views or poor choices.
- each attempt to code such functionality introduced `maintenence burden`.

Considering all those factors, the best strategy was to abstract and create specialized libraries above Fetch API. Here are few, depending on what Framework you use:

- React
  - **TanStack Query (React Query):** Open Source ecosystem tool for data fetching and state management.
  - **RTK Query:** Open Source ecosystem tool, can only be used with **Redux** state management tool.
- Angular
  - **HttpClient with RxJS:** Native tool for data fetching, combined with the "observer pattern"
- Vue
  - **TanStack Query (Vue Query):** Open Source ecosystem tool for data fetching and state management.

## Summary

Next section continues with **04. React Query**
